---
title: "5 :  Loop's in Rust"
layout: post
date: 2023-02-28
---
# Loops in Rust

Similar to other programming languages Rust had while and for loops adding to that, Rust also had the **loop** pre defined function which starts the loops immeditely.

# Rust loop
A **loop** expression that prints “Hello” until it is broken by a condition:


        let mut count = 0;
        loop {
            count += 1;
            println!("Hello");
            if count == 5 {
                break;
            }
        }

# While loop
A while expression that prints numbers from 1 to 5, it is created with the keyword **while**.

      let mut counter = 1;
      while counter < 6 {
          println!("{}", counter);
          counter += 1;
      }

# For Loop
A for expression that iterates over a range and prints 
“FizzBuzz” for multiples of 15, “Fizz” for multiples of 3 and “Buzz” for multiples of 5:

    for n in 1..101 {
                if n % 15 == 0 {
                    println!("FizzBuzz");
                } else if n % 3 == 0 {
                    println!("Fizz");
                } else if n % 5 == 0 {
                    println!("Buzz");
                } else {
                    println!("{}", n);
                }
            }
# Rust Ownership
Ownership is a set of rules that govern how a Rust program manages memory1. It enables Rust to make memory safety guarantees without needing a garbage collector2. Ownership is based on three principles.

1. Each value in Rust has an owner.
2. There can only be one owner at a time.
3. When the owner goes out of scope, the value will be dropped.

Example:-
if we have a variable x that owns a value 10, we can assign it to another variable y, but then x will no longer own the value. The ownership is transferred to y. When y goes out of scope, the value 10 will be freed from memory.

        let x = 10; // x owns 10
        let y = x; // y owns 10, x does not
        // do something with y
        // y goes out of scope, 10 is dropped

# Creating Class in Rust
Creating a class with MyClass name using struct with one field x of type i32. The impl block defines three methods for the struct: new, which constructs a new instance of the struct; print_x, which prints the value of the field x; and double_x, which doubles the value of the field x.

In the main function, we create an instance of MyClass using the new method and assign it to a mutable variable. Then we call the two methods on this instance using dot notation.

    Code:-
            struct MyClass {
                            x: i32,
                        }

                        impl MyClass {
                            fn new(x: i32) -> MyClass {
                                MyClass { x }
                            }

                            fn print_x(&self) {
                                println!("x is: {}", self.x);
                            }

                            fn double_x(&mut self) {
                                self.x *= 2;
                            }
                        }

                        fn main() {
                            let mut my_instance = MyClass::new(10);
                            my_instance.print_x();
                            my_instance.double_x();
                            my_instance.print_x();
                        }

# When you run this code, it will print:
                                            x is: 20
                                            x is: 10
                                            
# Challenge
In this challenge I am going to create a program in Rust that takes in two matrices as input and returns the result of their matrix multiplication.

Code:-

                                fn main() {
                                    let mat1 = vec![
                                        vec![1, 2],
                                        vec![3, 4],
                                        vec![5, 6],
                                    ];
                                    let mat2 = vec![
                                        vec![7, 8, 9],
                                        vec![10, 11, 12],
                                    ];
                                    let result = matrix_multiplication(&mat1, &mat2);
                                    println!("{:?}", result);
                                }

                                fn matrix_multiplication(mat1: &Vec<Vec<i32>>, mat2: &Vec<Vec<i32>>) -> Vec<Vec<i32>> {
                                    let rows1 = mat1.len();
                                    let cols1 = mat1[0].len();
                                    let rows2 = mat2.len();
                                    let cols2 = mat2[0].len();
                                    assert_eq!(cols1, rows2);

                                    let mut result = vec![vec![0; cols2]; rows1];
                                    for i in 0..rows1 {
                                        for j in 0..cols2 {
                                            let mut sum = 0;
                                            for k in 0..cols1 {
                                                sum += mat1[i][k] * mat2[k][j];
                                            }
                                            result[i][j] = sum;
                                        }
                                    }

                                    result
                                }


# Output
                
                [[27, 30, 33], [61, 68, 75], [95, 106, 117]]
# Explanation
This above Rust program performs matrix multiplication on two matrices, represented as vectors of vectors of integers. In matrix multiplication, we take the dot product of each row of the first matrix with each column of the second matrix to get the corresponding entry in the result matrix.

The main function defines two matrices, mat1 and mat2, and calls the matrix_multiplication function to compute their product. The result is stored in the result variable, which is then printed to the console.

The matrix_multiplication function takes two matrices as arguments and returns their product as a new matrix. It first checks that the number of columns in the first matrix is equal to the number of rows in the second matrix. If this condition is not met, it throws an error.

The function then initializes a new matrix with the appropriate dimensions to store the result of the multiplication. It uses nested for loops to iterate over the elements of the two matrices and compute the corresponding entry in the result matrix. The sum variable is used to accumulate the dot product of each row of the first matrix with each column of the second matrix.

Once all entries in the result matrix have been computed, the function returns the resulting matrix.

Overall, this program demonstrates how to perform a matrix multiplication using vectors and loops in Rust.
