---
title: "4 :  Function Parameter's, Control Structures & Other's"
layout: post
date: 2023-02-08
---
In this blog, you will learn about some important topics in programming, such as function parameters which is very widely used in every programming, Control structures and loop statements in Rust, Control structures let us execute different code blocks based on conditions. Loop statements let us repeat a task multiple times. This way, we can avoid redundant or unnecessary code and handle different scenarios with ease. We can also save time and space in our code and make it easier to debug and maintain.


# If Else

In Rust, if…else statement allows us add alternative set of test conditions in if…else statement using else-if and single else statements for if condition1. 

For example 🦖:

            let x = 3;

            if x < 10 {
                println!("{} is less than 10", x);
            } else {
                println!("{} is greater than or equal to 10", x);
            }
    
    
    Output:-
        
            This code prints 3 is less than 10 because the condition x < 10 is true.
            
# Handling Multiple Conditions with else if      

            let number = 6;

            if number % 4 == 0 {
                println!("number is divisible by 4");
            } else if number % 3 == 0 {
                println!("number is divisible by 3");
            } else if number % 2 == 0 {
                println!("number is divisible by 2");
            } else {
                println!("number is not divisible by 4, 3, or 2");
            }
            
    Output:-
             Number is divisible by 3.

When an if…else statement is executed, it checks a condition and runs a block of code if the condition is true. Otherwise, it runs another block of code if there is an else clause. It skips any remaining statements after that.

# Function Parameter's

We can define functions to have parameters, which are special variables that are part of a function’s signature. When a function has parameters, you can provide it with concrete values for those parameters. Technically, the concrete values are called arguments, but in casual conversation, people tend to use the words **parameter and argument interchangeably** for either the variables in a function’s definition or the concrete values passed in when you call a function.

Example 🦖:
            
            fn main() {
                        another_function(5);
                      }

            fn another_function(x: i32) {
                        println!("The value of x is: {x}");
            }
            
            Output:-
                    The value of x is: 5
# Passing Multiple Argument's in a Function
            
                        fn main() 
                        {
                                    print_labeled_measurement(5, 'h');
                        }

                        fn print_labeled_measurement(value: i32, unit_label: char) 
                        {
                            println!("The measurement is: {value}{unit_label}");
                        }
                        
            Output:- 
                        The measurement is: 5h

# Break Statement
When break is encountered, execution of the associated loop body is immediately terminated.

Example Code 🦖:  

                        let mut last = 0;

                        for x in 1..100 {
                            if x > 12 {
                                break;
                            }
                            last = x;
                        }

                        assert_eq!(last, 12);
                        println!("{last}");
            Output:-
                        1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 // breaks
                        
Here, assert_eq! is a way of testing if your code works as you expect. You give it two values that you think should be the same, and it will check if they are really the same. If they are not the same, it will stop your program and tell you what went wrong.
                        
     
            
                   
