---
title: "3 : Common Concepts in Rust"
layout: post
date: 2023-02-08
---

Similar to other programming languages, **RUST** had some predefined words such that these keywords cannot be used as a variable names or creating functions.

We already know that, by default Rust creates immutable variables, but we can change that by adding **‘mut’** in-front of variable name.

**Creating a default variable x**

    fn main() {
        let x = 5;
        println!("The value of x is: {}", x);
        x = 6;
        println!("The value of x is: {}", x);
    }

**Error 🛑**

    let x = 5;  - first assignment to `x`
    x = 6;      - Cannot assign twice to immutable variable



**Creating a muttable variable x**

     fn main() {
          let mut x = 5;
          println!("The value of x is: {}", x);
          x = 6;
          println!("The value of x is: {}", x);
      }


**Output 🦖**

    The value of x is: 5
    The value of x is: 6

# What is main difference between a immutable Variable and a Constant?

A constant is like a value that never changes. It is declared, when the program is created, and it can't be changed during the program's execution. 

**for example**

1. pi which is **3.14**, you will fix this value while creating the program, and it cannot be changed until the completion of program. 
   An immutable variable, on the other hand, is like a value that can be set once and then never changed again. 

2. Suppose you want to calculate the area of a rectangle (length * breadth) and the volume of a box (length * breadth * height), where the length is the          
   same for both calculations and you need to get the length from the user input and the length cannot be changed up to at the end of the program. 

# Statically typed Language
Rust is a statically typed language, which means that it must know the types of all variables at compile time.

# Scalar Types in Rust
A scalar type represents a single value. Rust has four primary scalar types: integers, floating-point numbers, Booleans, and characters. You may recognize these from other programming languages. 

**Integer:-**
An integer is a number without a fractional component.
        
        fn main() 
        {
            let my_int: i32 = 42;
        }

**Float:-**
Rust also has two primitive types for floating-point numbers, which are numbers with decimal points. Rust’s floating-point types are f32 and f64, which are 32 bits and 64 bits in size, respectively. 

        fn main() 
        {
            let x = 2.0; // f64
            let y: f32 = 3.0; // f32
        }

**Numeric Operations:-**
Rust supports the basic mathematical operations you’d expect for all of the number types: addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and remainder. 

    fn main() 
    {
    
            // addition
            let sum = 5 + 10;

            // subtraction
            let difference = 95.5 - 4.3;

            // multiplication
            let product = 4 * 30;

            // division
            let quotient = 56.7 / 32.2;

            // remainder 
                let remainder = 43 % 5;
    }

**Boolean Type:-**
A Boolean type in Rust has two possible values: true and false. Booleans are one byte in size. The Boolean type in Rust is specified using **bool**. 

    fn main() 
    {
        let t = true;
        let f: bool = false; // with explicit type annotation
    }

**Tuple:-**
A tuple is a general way of grouping together some number of other values with a variety of types into one compound type. Tuples have a fixed length: once declared, they cannot grow or shrink in size. 

    fn main() 
    {
        let tup: (i32, f64, u8) = (500, 6.4, 1);
    } 

The variable tup binds to the entire tuple, because a tuple is considered a single compound element. To get the individual values out of a tuple, we can use pattern matching to **destructure a tuple value**, like this: 

    fn main() 
    {
        let tup = (500, 6.4, 1);
        let (x, y, z) = tup;
        println!("The value of y is: {}", y);
    }

**Array:-**
A collection of multiple values is with an array. Unlike a tuple, every element of an array **must have the same type**. Arrays in Rust are different from arrays in some other languages because arrays in **Rust have a fixed length, like tuples.** 
In Rust, the values going into an array are written as a comma-separated list inside square brackets: 

    fn main() 
    {
        let a = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
    } 
